---
layout: article
author: david
author_profile: true
title: "Why Rebel?"
excerpt: "We simply do not have time for business as usual or slow change."
share: true
theme: lightPink

quote:
  author: Oscar Wilde
  image:
    url: /assets/images/quotes/oscar-wilde.jpg
    alt: Oscar Wilde
  text:
    - Disobedience, in the eyes of anyone who has read history, is humankind’s original virtue. It is by disobedience that progress has been made, disobedience and rebellion.
---

What motivated Oscar Wilde to make such a radical statement as this? Oftentimes we are taught in our education system
to ‘change the system from within’ or to become ‘successful’ and make positive, small reformative measures to improve 
society. Democracy is a slow moving beast: it takes time to change a system when it is business as usual, 
and there’s a reason for that.

People in power have got where they are usually by climbing the ladder of the status quo. The financial, political and 
social system has rungs that the powerful have climbed – either through hard work or inherited privilege, or both – 
and they are therefore not likely to try and undermine or weaken it. The status quo has served the powerful very well, 
and they tend to be fond and protective of it.

Positive change in social structure has always come from beneath. Votes for women, the abolition of slavery, the end of
apartheid and British rule in India, the end of slavery (massively influenced by successful rebellions in places 
like Ghana), the civil rights movement, our welfare system and the NHS. All of these changes were caused by people 
rebelling against the status quo, and saying in word and deed that there is something drastically wrong. Change must
happen now.

Why Rebel? Because, as Naomi Klein says: the science about climate change and biodiversity ‘changes everything’. 
We could be looking at mass starvation and famine within 10 years, a collapse in global fisheries by 2050, rising sea
levels and the whole host of apocalyptic global scenarios. We simply do not have time for business as usual or slow
change. The largest body of scientific research ever gathered, the IPCC, has told us we have 11 years to make a 
drastic change to our carbon emissions. More recent studies say it may actually be closer to 
[17 months](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-48964736){: rel="noreferrer noopener nofollow" target="_blank"} 
at the time of writing. Our economic and political systems are intrinsically tied to the fossil fuel industry,
our infrastructure absolutely reliant on emitting carbon. Business as usual in a situation like this is the equivalent
of continuing smoking when one is diagnosed with cancer, of accepting Netflix’s next recommendation when the kitchen’s
on fire, of continuing to try and convince your gran that what she just said was racist when she’s already about to
have a stroke.

Sometimes, you just need a change of tactic. That time is now.

It’s rebellion or game over, my friends. And I, for one, would like there still to be a life for my children and 
students long after I’m gone.
